Biden Clears the Way for Alaska Oil Project
The administration issued an analysis that indicates a scaled-back version of the Willow project could go
forward. Opponents call the drilling plan a “carbon bomb.”
By Lisa Friedman
Feb. 1, 2023
WASHINGTON — The Biden administration on Wednesday took a crucial step toward approving a $8
billion ConocoPhillips oil drilling project on the National Petroleum Reserve in Alaska, drawing the anger
of environmentalists who say the vast new fossil fuel development poses a dire threat to the climate.
The Bureau of Land Management issued an environmental analysis that says the government prefers a
scaled-back version of the project, which is known as Willow. The assessment calls for curtailing the
project to three drill sites from five, as well as reducing the proposed length of both gravel and ice roads,
pipelines and the length of airstrips to support the drilling.
The analysis is the last regulatory hurdle before the federal government makes a final ruling on whether to
approve the Willow project. If approved, it project would produce about 600 million barrels of oil over 30
years, with a peak of 180,000 barrels of crude oil a day.
Separately, Bureau of Land Management and White House officials are considering additional measures
to reduce carbon dioxide emissions and environmental harm, such as delaying decisions on permits for
one of the drill sites and planting trees, according to two people familiar with the discussions.
The final decision could come within the next month. But, in concluding that limited drilling could occur
on the land in Alaska’s North Slope, the Biden administration has already sent a strong signal that it is
likely to give the project a green light, both supporters and opponents said.
The Department of the Interior issued a statement saying the agency still had “substantial concerns” about
the Willow project, “including direct and indirect greenhouse gas emissions and impacts to wildlife and
Alaska Native subsistence.” The analysis notes that the agency might make final changes “that would be
more environmentally protective” like delaying a ruling about permits to more than one drill site.
The report was greeted with relief by Alaskan lawmakers and ConocoPhillips executives, who wanted a
more expansive area for drilling but were worried that President Biden, who has made tackling climate
change a centerpiece of his agenda, would work to block the project entirely.
ConocoPhillips said in a statement that it welcomed the environmental analysis and said the alternative
selected by the Bureau of Land Management provided “a viable path forward” for the Willow project.
“We believe Willow will benefit local communities and enhance American energy security while
producing oil in an environmentally and socially responsible manner,” Erec S. Isaacson, president of
ConocoPhillips Alaska, said in a statement. He said the project had undergone five years of regulatory
review and called on the administration to approve the plan “without delay.”
Alaska’s senators, Lisa Murkowski and Dan Sullivan, both Republicans, issued statements calling on the
Biden administration to approve the project without additional restrictions beyond those outlined in
alternative selected by the Bureau of Land Management.
“Thousands of good union jobs, and immense benefits that will be felt across Alaska and the nation, will
hang in the balance until a positive final decision has been issued,” Ms. Murkowski said.
The option is the smallest footprint possible for the Willow project with a more limited impact on the
immediate environment, but still allows the company access to the area’s vast petroleum reserves. In
addition to the three drilling sites, the Bureau of Land Management’s preferred option calls for about 482
acres of gravel fill, more than 400 miles of ice roads and about 89 miles of pipelines.
The agency said the blueprint would reduce the proposed project’s footprint within the Teshekpuk Lake
Special Area, a critical ecological area in the petroleum reserve that supports migratory birds and is a
primary calving area and migration corridor for the Teshekpuk caribou herd.
Sign up for the Climate Forward newsletter Your must-read guide to the climate crisis. Get it in your
inbox.
Environmental activists said Mr. Biden was betraying his own climate change agenda. They noted that
even reducing the number of drill sites would still allow the company to extract most of the area’s vast
petroleum reserve, leading to 278 million metric tons of carbon dioxide emissions over the project’s
30-year lifetime, about the annual equivalent emissions of 66 new coal-fired power plants.
Mr. Biden has pledged to cut United States emissions at least 50 percent below 2005 levels by the end of
this decade in order to help avoid the worst consequences of global warming. He also made a promise on
the campaign trail to end new federal leases for oil and gas development.
Environmental groups said they intend to work to oppose Willow despite the signal from the
administration that the project will proceed.