Humanity Is Facing a Great Injustice. The World Bank Must Respond.
March 18, 2023
By The Editorial Board
It’s one of the great injustices of this era that countries contributing negligible amounts to global
carbon emissions are now feeling the most harrowing impacts of climate change. Pakistan,
which makes up less than 1 percent of the world’s carbon footprint, had a third of its territory
under water in last year’s floods. Parts of Kenya, Ethiopia and Somalia are experiencing the
worst drought in 70 years of record-keeping, threatening millions with famine, even though the
entire continent of Africa contributes less than 4 percent of global carbon emissions.
The World Bank and the donor countries that control it can do more to step up and tackle this
generational challenge. To make the World Bank and other multilateral lending institutions fit for
purpose in the 21st century, leaders need to figure out how to raise and leverage the massive
amounts of capital that are going to be necessary in the coming years to help countries adapt to
and mitigate a changing climate.
For years, climate financing took a back seat to the bank’s twin goals of reducing extreme
poverty and promoting shared prosperity. Today, it is integral to achieving those goals. Helping
the poorest of the poor will increasingly mean ensuring access to drought-resistant seeds and
access to water as lakes dry up. In middle-income countries, promoting shared prosperity will
increasingly mean expanding access to reliable, affordable clean energy. The World Bank has
played an active role in making progress in those areas. It has begun to help countries
incorporate climate change into their overall economic development plans and should continue
this necessary work.
Climate-related funding has already grown in importance at the bank; in fact, some of the
poorest countries are already worried that it will cut into funding for basics like education and
health care. That’s why additional funding is needed to assure them that taking global action on
climate won’t come at the expense of their development. About 36 percent of the money the
World Bank lent last year was classified as climate related, although questions have been raised
about how classifications are made. That comes to nearly $32 billion — a big jump from
previous years, but still far short of what is needed.
In 2009, donor countries promised to mobilize $100 billion a year by 2020 to help lower income
countries with mitigation and adaptation. They only mustered $83 billion, $36.9 billion of which
came from multilateral development banks and climate funds, in 2020. Those unfulfilled
promises haven’t gone unnoticed. According to Ephraim Mwepya Shitima, chair of the African
Group of Negotiators on climate change, many developing countries, including those in Africa,
have put forth ambitious plans to curb emissions in the future, but have been “hampered by the
pledged financial support, which are falling short of expectations.”
Although Covid, inflation and the energy crisis related to the war in Ukraine have strained
government budgets everywhere, it would be shortsighted to ignore the significance and
potential of investing in climate financing.
Getting new money in the door is important, but it’s not enough. The bank also should adopt
new strategies and new rules that will allow it to funnel money more quickly to where it is
needed the most and will be used most effectively. For instance, some small island states have
per capita incomes that are too high for concessional loans according to World Bank rules,
despite their acute vulnerability to climate change. Those rules should be revisited, in some
cases, to make sure that climate financing is prioritizing the areas that will make the biggest
difference.
The bank should also provide more grants and below-market financing related to climate, as
Senator Ed Markey of Massachusetts has called for. The World Bank and multilateral
development banks provided only 15 percent of their adaptation finance and less than 5 percent
of mitigation finance through grants — a fraction he called “shockingly low.” By comparison,
Green Climate Fund, a multilateral climate fund, issued grants 41 percent of the time for
adaptation and mitigation projects.
The transformation that is required at the World Bank will not be easy. But the departure of its
former president, David Malpass, who says he will resign in June, might help build confidence in
the bank’s climate work. Mr. Malpass, who was nominated by the Trump administration in 2019,
has been the subject of controversy since his bewildering public refusal last year to
acknowledge the role of human activity in extreme weather resulting from climate change.
Ajay Banga, the former chief executive of Mastercard, is President Biden’s nominee to lead the
bank, and is likely to be confirmed next month. The leadership change presents an opportunity
to clarify the bank’s role and lay out an ambitious vision for its future. If the benefits of investing
in climate change adaptation and mitigation are shared, so should the costs.