The Income Gap Is Becoming a Physical-Activity Divide
Nationwide, poor children and adolescents are participating far less in sports and fitness
activities than their more affluent peers.
On a sunny day, teens in running gear gather at the starting line of a track.
By Matt Richtel
Updated March 25, 2023
Over the last two decades, technology companies and policymakers warned of a “digital divide”
in which poor children could fall behind their more affluent peers without equal access to
technology. Today, with widespread internet access and smartphone ownership, the gap has
narrowed sharply.
But with less fanfare a different division has appeared: Across the country, poor children and
adolescents are participating far less in sports and fitness activities than more affluent
youngsters are. Call it the physical divide.
Data from multiple sources reveal a significant gap in sports participation by income level. A
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention study found that 70 percent of children from
families with incomes above about $105,000 — four times the poverty line — participated in
sports in 2020. But participation was around 51 percent for families in a middle-income range,
and just 31 percent for families at or below the poverty line.
A 2021 study of Seattle-area students from fifth grade through high school found that less
affluent youth were less likely to participate in sports than their more affluent peers. The study
also found that middle schoolers from more affluent families were three times as likely to meet
physical exercise guidelines as less affluent students.
A combination of factors is responsible. Spending cuts and changing priorities at some public
schools have curtailed physical education classes and organized sports. At the same time,
privatized youth sports have become a multibillion-dollar enterprise offering new opportunities —
at least for families that can afford hundreds to thousands of dollars each season for club-team
fees, uniforms, equipment, travel to tournaments and private coaching.
“What’s happened as sports has become privatized is that it has become the haves and
have-nots,” said Jon Solomon, editorial director for the Aspen Institute Sports and Society
Program.
Recent Aspen Institute research found that among children from families making less than
$25,000 a year, participation in a healthy level of activity fell to 26.6 percent in 2021 from 34.1
percent in 2013. For children from families with $25,000 to $50,000 in income, participation fell
during that time to 35.7 percent from 38.1 percent.
But among families with incomes above $100,000, participation rose in that period, to 46
percent from 43.9 percent, the Aspen Institute found.
“Particularly for low-income kids, if they don’t have access to sports within the school setting,
where are they going to get their physical activity?” Mr. Solomon said. “The answer is nowhere.”
Schools are not always filling the gap. A recent report from the Physical Activity Alliance, a
nonprofit organization, gave schools nationwide a grade of D– for physical fitness. That is a
downgrade from a C– in 2014, with the new grade reflecting even less access to regular
physical education classes, gym time and equipment in schools.
Ann Paulls-Neal, a longtime physical education teacher and track coach in Albuquerque, has
watched the trend play out. For nearly 20 years, until 2017, she taught at John Baker
Elementary, which drew students largely from middle- and higher-income families (less than
one-third qualified for free or reduced-price lunch). There, “all of my students did at least one
sport after school,” she said. “Club soccer or pretty much club anything.”
Then she moved to a school, Wherry Elementary, where 100 percent of the students qualified
for free or reduced-price lunch. Students played on the playground, she said, “but we had just
three kids that were playing any kind of sport outside of school.”
In 2019, Ms. Paulls-Neal became the department chair of health and physical education at
Highland High School, where 100 percent of students qualify for free lunch. Here, she said, she
was seeing the impact of “this club and school divide.”
More affluent children are often highly trained in sports — “a little bit ahead,” said Ms.
Paulls-Neal, who is also the executive director of the New Mexico chapter of the Society of
Health and Physical Educators, or SHAPE America. “And they are more comfortable moving,
where the students in low-income areas are not.”
A similar pattern is emerging in Unit District No. 5 in McLean County, Ill. Faced with budget
shortfalls, the district’s board of education voted this year to make a series of cuts, including to
sports. Next year all the junior high sports will be gone: boys’ and girls’ basketball,
cross-country, track, boys’ wrestling and baseball, and girls’ softball and volleyball.