OPINION
THE EDITORIAL BOARD
Putin Began His Unjust War One Year Ago. Here’s What Ukraine Needs Now.
Feb. 18, 2023
A year since Vladimir Putin ordered his forces to invade Ukraine, the war is far from over. However
bravely Ukrainians fight on, and however muddled the performance of Russia’s military, Ukraine cannot
prevail without continued and substantial Western assistance. Since the invasion, that has swelled to over
$150 billion in American and European spending, and the weapons supplied to Ukraine now include the
latest Western tanks and antiaircraft systems.
The United States and its major allies have been steadfast in their resolve to support Ukraine in its fight,
and their people have largely accepted the enormous cost. In the United States, the political resistance has
been limited largely to a few voices on the far right and far left. But questions will become only more
common as the war drags on. As Representative Kevin McCarthy, the speaker of the House, a Republican
and a strong supporter of Ukraine, has warned, “There should be no blank check on anything.”
He’s right.
Outside Europe and the United States, support for the Ukrainian cause is much less solid, making efforts
to punish Russia for its aggression less effective. Secretary of State Antony Blinken said in an interview
recorded Saturday for “Meet the Press” that China is providing nonlethal aid to Russia and is “strongly
considering providing lethal assistance to Russia.” Mr. Blinken expressed his “deep concern” to his
Chinese counterpart.
To strengthen the alliance supporting Ukraine, as the second year of this terrible and unnecessary conflict
begins, it is useful to examine why it is in the interest of the United States and other democracies to
expend so much wealth, and to take so great a risk in confronting a nuclear power.
The first reason, and the one that prompted an immediate response from the West, is the moral and ethical
obligation of the world’s democracies to help a nation whose freedom is threatened by an authoritarian
power. National self-determination has long been a guiding principle of American foreign policy. Various
U.S. administrations have honored it imperfectly, as is the case with so many guiding principles. But it
remains valuable in finding a way forward. In sending an armored column toward Kyiv and seeking to
overthrow its government, Mr. Putin clearly violated that principle, and threatens to return Europe to the
instability of previous eras, when nations frequently invaded each other and altered the continent’s
borders by force.
Russians might argue that the United States is hardly the innocent in its global dealings, whether invading
Iraq on false pretenses, or covertly working to overthrow governments in, among others, Chile and
Nicaragua. Certainly, there is much to criticize and debate in America’s foreign policy during and since
the Cold War. There are also those, notably the political scientist John Mearsheimer, who further argue
that the United States provoked Mr. Putin by failing to respect Russia’s national interests and, at one
point, pushing to bring Ukraine (and Georgia) into NATO.
The wisdom of incorporating former Soviet bloc countries into NATO remains a topic of considerable
disagreement among historians, but it is important to remember that it was not NATO that rushed to
expand. Rather, many countries that had suffered Moscow’s repressive and often brutal control urgently
sought the protections of the Western alliance against what they anticipated and feared would be a
resurgence of Russian ambitions. As for Ukraine, the prospect of joining NATO anytime soon had
dissipated long before the Russian invasion.
It was Ukrainians who rose up in the “Orange Revolution” against elections rigged to produce a
pro-Russian outcome in 2004, and Ukrainians who took to the streets again in 2014 over President Viktor
Yanukovich’s last-minute decision not seek closer relations with the European Union. The danger Mr.
Putin saw was not to Russia’s sphere of influence, but to his personal sphere of power; a democratic,
pro-Western Ukraine threatened to spread ideas that would directly challenge his monopoly on power. It is
no coincidence that Mr. Putin’s growing aggressiveness toward the West developed in tandem with his
growing authoritarianism at home. As his regime grew ever more repressive, his need for foreign threats,
real or concocted, increased proportionately, to justify tightening the screws on domestic opposition.
In the end, nothing the United States or its allies have done or have failed to do in the three decades since
the collapse of the Soviet Union even remotely justifies Mr. Putin’s attempt to bend Ukraine to his will by
brute force. He has to be stopped, and Ukraine has to be allowed to choose a democratic, independent
future. That is what U.S. leaders should stress in justifying continued support.
A conflict that ends with a stronger Ukraine will send a message that the United States does have the
resolve and capability to help counter the excesses of autocrats and bullies. The Biden administration’s
regular declarations of full support for Ukraine, even when military aspects of that support are under
discussion, demonstrate that America has not, as Mr. Putin thought, forever lost its ability to lead.
America’s readiness to stand up to Mr. Putin has united most of the world’s major democracies behind a
common cause.
Still, with so much uncertainty about the outcome on the battlefield, it remains unclear even what
“victory” might mean for either side. And ultimately, serious diplomacy has a chance only if Russia
accepts that it cannot bring Ukraine to its knees. And for that to happen, the United States and its allies
cannot waver in their support.